---
layout: post
title: Proteomics favourites from 2015
---

Unlike 2014, 2015 got off to something of a slow start in the proteomics department until a sudden crop of excellent papers appeared in autumn. All of these gave me lots to think about so picking a favourite was tricky. Actually, not really, I have something in mind but I’m trying to be dramatic and it doesn’t sound as good if I don’t dangle the carrot for a bit first. So, for the sake of narrative, lets assume it really was tricky decision. Our first contender for the coveted top spot in my printed-papers tray was the delightfully titled [“Panorama of ancient macromolecular metazoan complexes”](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v525/n7569/full/nature14877.html); if anything I like this one because it cleverly managed to escape the use of “landscape”, and "panorama" just makes it sound that little bit more sophisticated. It’s a landscape… but wider! Developing this idea further, my next paper will be entitled “Vista of vestigial viral coat complexes”.

This paper came from the lab of the evergreen Edward Marcotte, who somehow seems to have written papers on every new topic I pick up – a number of his early postdoctoral papers heavily influenced my MSc thesis on repeat proteins. But enough about Ed, the primary goal of the study was to investigate how heteromeric protein complexes have evolved in metazoans, though many of the conclusions likely apply to simpler unicellular organisms as well. The experiment used an elegant affinity-purification mass-spec design. In the past few years, improvements in MS sensitivity and dynamic range have enabled a marked improvement in the quality and utility of proteomics studies. In this case, they relied on very finely graduated fractions of the AP eluate to distinguish specific complexes – subunits from obligate complexes should come out in a very tight band, whilst loosely interacting proteins should be more dispersed. Feeding this data into a support vector machine allowed them to predict complexes across nine species with a high degree of accuracy, as verified by numerous controls.

Due to careful selection of species representing a well distributed spread of evolutionary time from yeast to human, they were able to impute the existence of complexes from a further 122 species, leading to the following broad conclusions: older complexes tend to be involved (unsurprisingly) in core cellular processes. Newer complexes however are significantly enriched in functions specific to multicellularity (how multicelluarity evolved is a deeply fascinating question in its own right, but one for another time). They also showed that older complexes tend to have more subunits. Intriguingly however, their data seemed to suggest that subunits from newer complexes, whilst being less numerous, had higher domain complexity. Gene fusions are known to be more likely amongst proteins that already interact, so it seems to me that they could be missing something here – if supposedly new complexes are in fact composed of proteins formed from fusions of older subunits, then the true rate at which “new” complexes are formed might be considerably lower.

A final nice observation was that enzymes acting sequentially in metabolic pathways were more likely to form complexes in more evolutionarily recent organisms. This mirrors the situation I’ve seen in a few other instances, for example in prokaryotic operons, gene order follows the order of protein complex assembly, but also the order of reactions in metabolic pathways. The fact that an analogous situation seems to be occurring in the evolution of complexes further serves to highlight the fact that biological processes occur on a continuum. Increasingly tight coupling of steps in a pathway may eventually lead to formation of a stable complex. The idea that metabolic pathways are one thing and protein complexes are another is wrong, and it’s important to bear in mind that, while discrete abstractions like this are useful, the true behaviour of the cell is totally independent of whatever language constructs we use to talk about it.

So… that really diverged quite a lot from what I had planned. This was going to be a technical discussion of [“A human interactome in three quantitative dimensions organized by stoichiometries and abundances”](http://www.cell.com/cell/abstract/S0092-8674(15)01270-2), with a few notable mentions thrown in for good measure. If I’m going to stick to my promise of at least one post a month, then I’d better stop here and make this a multi-parter. Apparently the difficulty in writing a blog is deciding what to write about, not how to fill the page. Still to come anyway, a cool gene knock-in study, the paper just mentioned, and a brief description of my favourite experimental design of the year. Possibly some flops too, though I think I'd have to cast the net wider than 2015 for that.

Jon
